Standards of Care in Diabetes—2023 Abridged for
Primary Care Providers
American Diabetes Association
The American Diabetes Association’s( A D A’s) Standards of Care in Diabetes is updated and published annually in a supplement to the January issue
of Diabetes Care. The Standards of Care is developed
by the ADA’s multidisciplinary Professional Practice
Committee, which comprises expert diabetes health
care professionals (HCPs). It includes the most current
evidence-based recommendations for diagnosing and
treating adults and children with all forms of diabetes.
ADA’s grading system usesA, B, C,o rE to show the evidence level that supports each recommendation.
/C15A— Clear evidence from well-conducted, generalizable randomized controlled trials that are adequately powered
/C15B— Supportive evidence from well-conducted cohort
studies
/C15C— Supportive evidence from poorly controlled or
uncontrolled studies
/C15E— Expert consensus or clinical experience
This is an abridged version of the current Standards of
Care containing the evidence-based recommendations
most pertinent to primary care. The recommendations,
tables, andﬁgures included here retain the same numbering used in the complete Standards of Care. All of
the recommendations included here are substantively
the same as in the complete Standards of Care. The
abridged version does not include references. The
complete 2023 Standards of Care, including all supporting references, is available at professional.
diabetes.org/standards.
1. IMPROVING CARE AND PROMOTING HEALTH
IN POPULATIONS
Diabetes and Population Health
Person-centered care considers individual patient comorbidities and prognoses; is respectful of and responsive to patient preferences, needs, and values; and
ensures that patient values guide all clinical decisions.
Further, social determinants of health (SDOH)— often
out of direct control of the individual and potentially
representing lifelong risk— contribute to health care
and psychosocial outcomes and must be addressed to
improve all health outcomes.
Recommendations
1.1 Ensure treatment decisions are timely, rely on
evidence-based guidelines, include social community support, and are made collaboratively with
patients based on individual preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, and informedﬁnancial considerations. B
1.2 Align approaches to diabetes management with
the Chronic Care Model. This model emphasizes person-centered team care, integrated
long-term treatment approaches to diabetes
and comorbidities, and ongoing collaborative
communication and goal-setting between all
team members. A
1.3 Care systems should facilitate in-person and virtual team-based care, including those knowledgeable and experienced in diabetes management as
part of the team and utilization of patient registries, decision support tools, and community involvement to meet patient needs.B
Strategies for System-Level Improvement
Care Teams
Collaborative, multidisciplinary teams are best suited to
provide care for people with diabetes and to facilitate
patients’self-management with emphasis on avoiding
therapeutic inertia to achieve recommended metabolic
targets.
Telehealth
Telehealth may increase access to care for people with
diabetes. Telehealth should be used complementary to
in-person visits to optimize glycemic management in
https://doi.org/10.2337/cd23-as01
©2022 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
4 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
STANDARDS OF CARE
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

people with unmanaged diabetes. Evidence suggests
that telehealth may be effective at reducing A1C in people with type 2 diabetes compared with or in addition
to usual care. Interactive strategies that facilitate communication between HCPs and patients appear more
effective.
Behaviors and Well-Being
Successful diabetes care requires a systematic approach
to supporting patients’behavior change efforts, including high-quality diabetes self-management education
and support (DSMES).
Tailoring Treatment for Social Context
Recommendations
1.5 Assess food insecurity, housing insecurity/
homelessness, ﬁnancial barriers, and social
capital/social community support to inform treatment decisions, with referral to appropriate local
community resources.A
1.6 Provide patients with additional self-management
support from lay health coaches, navigators, or
community health workers when available.A
Diabetes-related health inequities are well documented
and have been associated with greater risk for diabetes,
higher population prevalence, and poorer diabetes outcomes. Financial barriers to medication use continue to
contribute to health disparities.
2. CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF
DIABETES
Classification
Diabetes can be classiﬁed into the following general
categories:
1. Type 1 diabetes (due to autoimmuneb-cell destruction, usually leading to absolute insulin deﬁciency
including latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood)
2. Type 2 diabetes (due to a progressive loss ofb-cell
insulin secretion frequently on the background of insulin resistance)
3. Speciﬁc types of diabetes due to other causes, e.g.,
monogenic diabetes syndromes (such as neonatal diabetes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young),
diseases of the exocrine pancreas (such as cysticﬁbrosis and pancreatitis), and drug- or chemicalinduced diabetes (such as with glucocorticoid use,
in the treatment of HIV/AIDS, or after organ
transplantation)
4. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM; diabetes diagnosed
in the second or third trimester of pregnancy that was
not clearly overt diabetes prior to gestation)
The classiﬁcation of diabetes type is not always straightforward at presentation, and misdiagnosis may occur.
Therefore, constant diligence and sometimes reevaluation is necessary. Children with type 1 diabetes typically
present with polyuria and polydipsia, and approximately half present with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
Adults with type 1 diabetes can be diagnosed at any age
and may not present with classic symptoms. They may
have temporary remission from the need for insulin.
The diagnosis may become more obvious over time and
should be reevaluated if there is concern.
Screening and Diagnostic Tests for Prediabetes
and Type 2 Diabetes
The diagnostic criteria for diabetes and prediabetes are
shown in Table 2.2/2.5. Screening criteria for adults
and children are listed in Table 2.3 and Table 2.4,
respectively. Screening for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes risk through an informal assessment of risk factors
TABLE 2.2/2.5 Criteria for the Screening and Diagnosis of Prediabetes and Diabetes
Prediabetes Diabetes
A1C 5.7 –6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol)* $6.5% (48 mmol/mol)†
FPG 100 –125 mg/dL (5.6–6.9 mmol/L)* $126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)†
2-hour plasma glucose during 75-g OGTT 140 –199 mg/dL (7.8–11.0 mmol/L)* $200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L)†
Random plasma glucose — $200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L)‡
Adapted from Tables 2.2 and 2.5 in the complete 2023 Standards of Care.*For all three tests, risk is continuous, extending below the lower limit of
the range and becoming disproportionately greater at the higher end of the range.†In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, diagnosis requires
two abnormal test results from the same sample or in two separate samples.‡Only diagnostic in a patient with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or
hyperglycemic crisis.
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 5
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

or with an assessment tool, such as the ADA’s Diabetes
Risk Test (diabetes.org/socrisktest) is recommended
and can inform who needs laboratory testing.
Marked discrepancies between measured A1C and
plasma glucose levels should prompt consideration that
the A1C assay may not be reliable for that individual,
and one should consider using an alternate A1C assay
or plasma blood glucose criteria for diagnosis. (An updated list of A1C assays with interferences is available
at ngsp.org/interf.asp.)
If an individual has a test result near the margins of the
diagnostic threshold, the clinician should follow that
person closely and repeat the test in 3–6 months. If using the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), fasting or
carbohydrate restriction 3 days prior to the test should
be avoided, as it can falsely elevate glucose levels.
Screening Before Pregnancy
Recommendation
2.26a In individuals who are planning pregnancy,
screen those with risk factorsB and consider
testing all individuals of childbearing potential
for undiagnosed diabetes.E
See “15. MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES IN PREGNANCY”
for additional information.
3. PREVENTION OR DELAY OF TYPE 2
DIABETES AND ASSOCIATED COMORBIDITIES
Recommendation
3.1 Monitor for the development of type 2
diabetes in those with prediabetes at least
annually; modify based on individual risk/
beneﬁt assessment. E
TABLE 2.3 Criteria for Screening for Diabetes or Prediabetes in Asymptomatic Adults
1. Testing should be considered in adults with overweight or obesity (BMI$25 kg/m2 or $23 kg/m2 in Asian American individuals) who have
one or more of the following risk factors:
/C15First-degree relative with diabetes
/C15High-risk race/ethnicity (e.g., African American, Latino, Native American, Asian American, Paciﬁc Islander)
/C15History of CVD
/C15Hypertension ($130/80 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)
/C15HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (0.90 mmol/L) and/or a triglyceride level>250 mg/dL (2.82 mmol/L)
/C15Individuals with polycystic ovary syndrome
/C15Physical inactivity
/C15Other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance (e.g., severe obesity, acanthosis nigricans)
2. People with prediabetes (A1C$5.7% [39 mmol/mol], IGT, or IFG) should be tested yearly.
3. People who were diagnosed with GDM should have lifelong testing at least every 3 years.
4. For all other people, testing should begin at age 35 years.
5. If results are normal, testing should be repeated at a minimum of 3-year intervals, with consideration of more frequent testing depending on
initial results and risk status.
6. People with HIV.
IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance.
TABLE 2.4 Risk-Based Screening for Type 2 Diabetes or Prediabetes in Asymptomatic Children and Adolescents in a
Clinical Setting
Screening should be considered in youth* who have overweight ($85th percentile) or obesity ($95th percentile) A and who have one or more
additional risk factors based on the strength of their association with diabetes:
/C15Maternal history of diabetes or GDM during the child’s gestation A
/C15Family history of type 2 diabetes inﬁrst- or second-degree relativeA
/C15Race/ethnicity (Native American, African American, Latino, Asian American, Paciﬁc Islander) A
/C15Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin resistance (acanthosis nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, polycystic ovary
syndrome, or small-for-gestational-age birth weight)B
*After the onset of puberty or after 10 years of age, whichever occurs earlier. If tests are normal, repeat testing at a minimum of 3-year intervals (or more frequently if BMI is increasing or risk factor proﬁle deteriorating) is recommended. Reports of type 2 diabetes before age
10 years exist, and this can be considered with numerous risk factors.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
6 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Lifestyle Behavior Change for Diabetes
Prevention
Recommendations
3.2 Refer adults with overweight/obesity at high risk
of type 2 diabetes, as typiﬁed by the Diabetes
Prevention Program (DPP), to an intensive lifestyle behavior change program to achieve and
maintain a weight reduction of at least 7% of
initial body weight through healthy reducedcalorie diet and$150 minutes/week of
moderate-intensity physical activity. A
3.3 A variety of eating patterns can be considered to
prevent diabetes in individuals with prediabetes.B
The DPP trial demonstrated that an intensive lifestyle
intervention could reduce the risk of incident type 2 diabetes by 58% over 3 years. DPP has been proven to be
cost-effective and technology-assisted programs may be
effective and should be considered.
A list of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention–recognized diabetes prevention lifestyle
change programs is available (cdc.gov/diabetes/
prevention/ﬁnd-a-program.html).
Pharmacologic Interventions
Recommendations
3.6 Metformin therapy for the prevention of type 2
diabetes should be considered in adults at high
risk of type 2 diabetes, as typiﬁed by the DPP,
especially those aged 25–59 years with BMI
$35 kg/m2, higher fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
(e.g., $110 mg/dL), and higher A1C (e.g.,
$6.0%), and in individuals with prior GDM.A
3.7 Long-term use of metformin may be associated
with biochemical vitamin B12 deﬁciency; consider periodic measurement of vitamin B12 levels
in metformin-treated individuals, especially in
those with anemia or peripheral neuropathy.B
Various pharmacologic agents have been evaluated for
type 2 diabetes prevention, and metformin has the
strongest evidence base. However, no agents have been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for diabetes prevention.
Prevention of Vascular Disease and Mortality
Recommendations
3.8 Prediabetes is associated with heightened cardiovascular (CV) risk; therefore, screening for and
treatment of modiﬁable risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD) are suggested.B
3.9 Statin therapy may increase the risk of type 2
diabetes in people at high risk of developing type 2
diabetes. In such individuals, glucose status
should be monitored regularly and diabetes prevention approaches reinforced. It is not recommended that statins be discontinued.B
3.10 In people with a history of stroke and evidence
of insulin resistance and prediabetes, pioglitazone may be considered to lower the risk of
stroke or myocardial infarction (MI). However,
this beneﬁt needs to be balanced with the increased risk of weight gain, edema, and fracture.
A Lower doses may mitigate the risk of adverse
effects. C
Person-Centered Care Goals
Recommendations
3.11 In adults with overweight/obesity at high risk of
type 2 diabetes, care goals should include weight
loss or prevention of weight gain, minimizing
the progression of hyperglycemia, and attention
to CV risk and associated comorbidities.B
3.12 Pharmacotherapy (e.g., for weight management,
minimizing the progression of hyperglycemia,
CV risk reduction) may be considered to support
person-centered care goals.B
3.13 More intensive preventive approaches should be
considered in individuals who are at particularly
high risk of progression to diabetes, including
individuals with BMI$35 kg/m2, those at higher
glucose levels (e.g., FPG 110–125 mg/dL, 2-hour
postchallenge glucose 173–199 mg/dL, A1C
$6.0%), and individuals with a history of GDM.A
4. COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION
AND ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES
Person-Centered Collaborative Care
Recommendations
4.1 A person-centered communication style that uses
person-centered, culturally sensitive, and
strength-based language and active listening;
elicits individual preferences and beliefs; and assesses literacy, numeracy, and potential barriers
to care should be used to optimize health outcomes and health-related quality of life (QoL).B
Diabetes treatment goals are to prevent or delay complications and optimize QoL (Figure 4.1 ). The use of
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 7
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

inclusive and empowering language that is respectful
a n df r e eo fs t i g m ac a nh e l pt oi n f o r ma n dm o t i v a t e
people. Language that judges may undermine this
effort.
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation
Recommendations
4.3 A complete medical evaluation should be performed at the initial visit to:
/C15Conﬁrm the diagnosis and classify diabetes.A
/C15Evaluate for diabetes complications, potential comorbid conditions, and overall health status.A
/C15Review previous treatment and risk factor management in people with established diabetes.A
/C15Begin engagement with the person with diabetes in the formulation of a care management
plan including initial goals of care.A
/C15Develop a plan for continuing care.A
4.4 A follow-up visit should include most components of the initial comprehensive medical evaluation (see Table 4.1 in the complete 2023
Standards of Care).A
4.5 Ongoing management should be guided by the
assessment of overall health status, diabetes
complications, CV risk, hypoglycemia risk, and
shared decision-making to set therapeutic
goals. B
SARS-CoV-2 Vaccines and Other Immunizations
The importance of routine vaccinations for people with
diabetes has been elevated by the coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Preventing avoidable
infections not only directly prevents morbidity, but
also reduces hospitalizations, which may additionally
reduce the risk of acquiring infections such as COVID19. Children and adults with diabetes should receive
vaccinations according to age-appropriate
recommendations.
In people with diabetes, higher blood glucose levels
prior to and during COVID-19 admission have been
associated with poor outcomes, including mortality.
People with diabetes should be prioritized and offered
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.
GOALS
OF CARE
 Prevent complications
 Optimize quality of life
REVIEW AND AGREE ON MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Review management plan
• Mutually agree on changes
• Ensure agreed modiﬁcation of therapy is implemented 
in a timely fashion to avoid therapeutic inertia
• Undertake decision cycle regularly (at least once/twice a year)
• Operate in an integrated system of care
UTILIZE SHARED DECISION-MAKING TO
CREATE A MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Ensure access to DSMES
• Involve an educated and informed person 
(and the individual’s family/caregiver)
• Explore perso nal preferences
• Language matters (include person-ﬁrst,
strengths-based, empowering language)
• Include motivational interviewing, goal 
setting, and shared decision-making
PROVIDE ONGOING SUPPORT AND 
MONITORING OF:
• Emotional well-being
• Lifestyle and health behaviors
• Tolerability of medications
• Biofeedback including BGM/CGM,
weight, step count, A1C, BP , lipids
AGREE ON MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Specify SMART goals:
- Speciﬁc
- Measurable
- Achievable
- Realistic
- Time limited
ASSESS KEY PERSON CHARACTERISTICS
• The individual’s priorities
• Current lifestyle and health behaviors
• Comorbidities (i.e., CVD, CKD, HF)
• Clinical characteristics (i.e., age, A1C, weight)
• Issues such as motivation, depression, cognition
• Social determinants of health
CONSIDER SPECIFIC FACTORS THAT IMPACT CHOICE 
OF TREATMENT
• Individualized glycemic and weight goals
• Impact on weight, hypoglycemia, and cardiorenal protection
• Underlying physiological factors
• Side effect proﬁles of medications
• Complexity of regimen (i.e., frequency, mode of administration)
• Regimen choice to optimize medication use
and reduce treatment discontinuation
• Access, cost, and availability of medication
DECISION CYCLE FOR PERSON-CENTERED GLYCEMIC MANAGEMENT IN TYPE 2 DIABETES
IMPLEMENT MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Ensure there is regular review; 
more frequent contact initially
is often desirable for DSMES
FIGURE 4.1Decision cycle for person-centered glycemic management in type 2 diabetes. Adapted from Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins
BS, et al. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
8 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Assessment of Selected Comorbidities
Cancer
People with diabetes should be encouraged to undergo
recommended age- and sex-appropriate cancer screenings and to reduce their modiﬁable cancer risk factors
(obesity, physical inactivity, and smoking).
Cognitive Impairment/Dementia
See “13. OLDER ADULTS.”
Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Recommendation
4.10 People with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes with
cardiometabolic risk factors, who have either
elevated liver enzymes (ALT) or fatty liver on imaging or ultrasound, should be evaluated for presence
of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and liverﬁbrosis.C
5. FACILITATING POSITIVE HEALTH BEHAVIORS
AND WELL-BEING TO IMPROVE HEALTH
OUTCOMES
Essential to achieving diabetes treatment goals are
DSMES, medical nutrition therapy (MNT), routine physical activity, tobacco cessation counseling when needed,
health behavior counseling, and psychosocial care.
DSMES
Recommendations
5.2 There are four critical times to evaluate the need
for DSMES to promote skills acquisition to aid
treatment plan implementation, MNT, and wellbeing: at diagnosis, annually and/or when not
meeting treatment targets, when complicating
factors develop (medical, physical, psychosocial),
and when transitions in life and care occur.E
5.4 DSMES should be person-centered, may be offered
i ng r o u po ri n d i v i d u a ls e t t i n g s ,a n ds h o u l db ec o m municated with the entire diabetes care team.A
5.5 Digital coaching and digital self-management interventions can be effective methods to deliver
DSMES.B
5.9 Consider addressing barriers to DSMES access
through telehealth delivery of careB and other
digital health solutions.C
MNT
All HCPs should refer people with diabetes for individualized MNT provided by a registered dietitian
nutritionist who is knowledgeable and skilled in providing diabetes-speciﬁc MNT.
Goals of Nutrition Therapy for Adults With Diabetes
1. To promote and support healthful eating patterns,
emphasizing a variety of nutrient-dense foods in appropriate portion sizes, to improve overall health
and:
/C15Achieve and maintain body weight goals
/C15Attain individualized glycemic, blood pressure
(BP), and lipid goals
/C15Delay or prevent diabetes complications
2. To address individual nutrition needs based on personal and cultural preferences, health literacy and
numeracy, access to healthful foods, willingness and
ability to make behavioral changes, and existing barriers to change
3. To maintain the pleasure of eating by providing
nonjudgmental messages about food choices while
limiting food choices only when indicated by scientiﬁc evidence
4. To provide an individual with diabetes the practical
tools for developing healthy eating patterns rather
than focusing on individual macronutrients, micronutrients, or single foods
Assessing Food Insecurity
Any member of the health care team can screen for food
insecurity using The Hunger Vital Sign. Households are
considered at risk if they answer either or both of the
following statements as“often true” or “sometimes
true” (compared with“never true”):
“Within the past 12 months, we worried whether our
food would run out before we got money to buy more.”
“Within the past 12 months, the food we bought just
didn’t last, and we didn’t have money to get more.”
Physical Activity
Recommendations
5.28 Children and adolescents with type 1 diabetesC
or type 2 diabetes or prediabetesB should engage
in 60 minutes/day or more of moderate- or vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, with vigorous muscle-strengthening and bone-strengthening
activities at least 3 days/week.
5.29 Most adults with type 1 diabetesC and type 2 diabetes B should engage in 150 minutes or more of
moderate- to vigorous-intensity aerobic activity per
week, spread over at least 3 days/week, with no
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 9
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

more than 2 consecutive days without
activity. Shorter durations (minimum
75 minutes/week) of vigorous-intensity or
interval training may be sufﬁcient for younger and
more physicallyﬁt individuals.
5.30 Adults with type 1 diabetesC and type 2 diabetes B should engage in 2–3 sessions/week of
resistance exercise on nonconsecutive days.
5.31 All adults, and particularly those with type 2
diabetes, should decrease the amount of time
spent in daily sedentary behavior.B Prolonged
sitting should be interrupted every 30 minutes
for blood glucose beneﬁts. C
5.32 Flexibility training and balance training are recommended 2–3 times/week for older adults with
diabetes. Yoga and tai chi may be included based
on individual preferences to increaseﬂexibility,
muscular strength, and balance.C
5.33 Evaluate baseline physical activity and sedentary
time. Promote increase in nonsedentary activities
above baseline for sedentary individuals with type 1
diabetesE and type 2 diabetes.B Examples include
walking, yoga, housework, gardening, swimming,
and dancing.
Smoking Cessation: Tobacco and E-Cigarettes
Recommendations
5.34 Advise all individuals not to use cigarettes and
other tobacco products or e-cigarettes.A
5.35 After identiﬁcation of tobacco or e-cigarette use,
include smoking cessation counseling and other
forms of treatment as a routine component of
diabetes care.A
Psychosocial Care
Recommendations
5.38 Psychosocial care should be provided to all people with diabetes, with the goal of optimizing
health-related QoL and health outcomes. Such
care should be integrated with routine medical
care and delivered by trained HCPs using a collaborative, person-centered, culturally informed
approach. A When indicated and available, qualiﬁed mental health professionals should provide
additional targeted mental health care.B
5.39 Diabetes care teams should implement psychosocial screening protocols that may include but
are not limited to attitudes about diabetes, expectations for treatment and outcomes, general
and diabetes-related mood, stress and/or QoL,
available resources (ﬁnancial, social, family,
and emotional), and/or psychiatric history.
Screening should occur at periodic intervals
and when there is a change in disease, treatment, or life circumstances.C
5.40 When indicated, refer to mental health professionals or other trained HCPs for further assessment and treatment for symptoms of
diabetes distress, depression, suicidality, anxiety, treatment-related fear of hypoglycemia,
disordered eating, and/or cognitive capacities.
Such specialized psychosocial care should use
age-appropriate standardized and validated tools
and treatment approaches.B
5.42 Routinely monitor people with diabetes, caregivers, and family members for diabetes distress,
particularly when treatment targets are not met
and/or at the onset of diabetes complications. Refer to a qualiﬁed mental health professional or
other trained HCP for further assessment and
treatment if indicated.B
Please refer to the ADA position statement“Psychosocial
Care for People With Diabetes” for a list of assessment tools
and additional details and the ADA Mental Health Toolkit
(https://professional.diabetes.org/meetings/mentalhealth-toolkit) for assessment questionnaires and surveys.
Sleep Health
Recommendation
5.55 Consider screening for sleep health in people
with diabetes, including symptoms of sleep disorders, disruptions to sleep due to diabetes symptoms or management needs, and worries about
sleep. Refer to sleep medicine and/or a qualiﬁed
behavioral health professional as indicated.B
The associations between sleep problems and diabetes
are complex: sleep disorders are a risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes and possibly GDM. Moreover,
sleep disturbances are associated with less engagement
in diabetes self-management and may interfere with the
achievement of glycemic targets among people with
type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
6. GLYCEMIC TARGETS
Assessment of Glycemic Control
Glycemic control is assessed by the A1C measurement,
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) using time in
range (TIR) and/or glucose management indicator
(GMI), and blood glucose monitoring (BGM).
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
10 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Glycemic Assessment
Recommendations
6.1 Assess glycemic status (A1C or other glycemic measurement such as TIR or GMI)at leasttwo times a
year in patients who are meeting treatment goals
(and who have stable glycemic control).E
6.2 Assess glycemic status at least quarterly and as needed
in patients whose therapy has recently changed and/
or who are not meeting glycemic goals.E
Glucose Assessment by CGM
Recommendations
6.3 Standardized, single-page glucose reports from
CGM devices with visual cues, such as the ambulatory glucose proﬁle (AGP), should be considered as
a standard summary for all CGM devices.E
6.4 TIR is associated with the risk of microvascular
complications and can be used for assessment
of glycemic control. Additionally, time below
r a n g e( T B R )a n dt i m ea b o v er a n g e( T A R )a r e
useful parameters for the evaluation of the
treatment plan (Table 6.2). C
Glycemic Goals
Recommendations
6.5a An A1C goal for many nonpregnant adults of
<7% (53 mmol/mol) without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia is appropriate.A
6.5b If using AGP/GMI to assess glycemia, a parallel goal
for many nonpregnant adults is TIR of>70% with
TBR <4% and time<54 mg/dL<1%. For those
with frailty or at high risk of hypoglycemia, a target
of >50% TIR with<1% TBR is recommended. (See
Figure 6.1 and Table 6.2.)B
6.6 On the basis of HCP judgment and patient preference, achievement of lower A1C levels than
the goal of 7% may be acceptable and even
beneﬁcial if it can be achieved safely without
signiﬁcant hypoglycemia or other adverse effects of treatment. B
6.7 Less stringent A1C goals (such as<8%
[64 mmol/mol]) may be appropriate for patients with limited life expectancy or where the
harms of treatment are greater than the beneﬁts. HCPs should consider deintensiﬁcation of
therapy if appropriate to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia in patients with inappropriate stringent A1C targets.B
The factors to consider in individualizing goals are depicted in Figure 6.2 in the complete 2023 Standards of
Care. Recommended glycemic targets for many nonpregnant adults are shown in Table 6.3. For speciﬁc
guidance, see“6. Glycemic Targets,”“14. Children and
Adolescents,” and “15. Management of Diabetes in
Pregnancy,” and “16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital” in
the complete 2023 Standards of Care. For information
about glycemic targets for older adults, see Table 13.1
in “13. OLDER ADULTS.”
TABLE 6.2 Standardized CGM Metrics for Clinical Care
1. Number of days CGM device is worn (recommend 14 days)
2. Percentage of time CGM device is active (recommend 70% of data from 14 days)
3. Mean glucose
4. GMI
5. Glycemic variability (%CV) target#36%*
6. TAR: % of readings and time>250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L) Level 2 hyperglycemia
7. TAR: % of readings and time 181–250 mg/dL (10.1–13.9 mmol/L) Level 1 hyperglycemia
8. TIR: % of readings and time 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol/L) In range
9. TBR: % of readings and time 54–69 mg/dL (3.0–3.8 mmol/L) Level 1 hypoglycemia
10. TBR: % of readings and time<54 mg/dL (<3.0 mmol/L) Level 2 hypoglycemia
*Some studies suggest that lower %CV targets (<33%) provide additional protection against hypoglycemia for those receiving insulin or sulfonylureas. %CV, percentage coefﬁcient of variation. Adapted from Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
1593–1603.
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 11
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

AGP Report: Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Test Patient DOB: Jan 1, 1970
14 Days: August 8–August 21, 2021
Time CGM Active: 100%
Glucose Metrics 
Average Glucose........................................... 175 mg/dL
Goal: <154 mg/dL
Glucose Management Indicator (GMI) ............... 7.5%
Goal: <7%
Glucose Variability............................................ 45.5%
Goal: <36%
AGP is a summary of glucose values from the report period, with median (50%) and other percentiles shown as if they occurred in a single day .
Time in Ranges Goals for T ype 1 and T ype 2 Diabetes
Very High 20%
High 24%
Target
Low 5%
Very Low 5%
46% Goal: >70%
Goal: <5%
Goal: <1%
44% Goal: <25%
10% Goal: <4%
Each 1% time in range = ~15 minutes
mg/dL
250
180
70
54
Target
Range
12am 3am 6am 9am 12pm 3pm 6pm 9pm 12am
350
mg/dL
250
 180
 70
54
0
95%
75%
50%
25%
5%
12pm 12pm 12pm 12pm 12pm 12pm 12pm 
Sunday Monday T uesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
180
70
8 9 10 11 12 13 14
180
70
15 16 17 18 19 20 21
mg/dLmg/dL
1313
FIGURE 6.1Key points included in standard AGP report. Reprinted from Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al. Diabetes Care
2021;44:2589–2625.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
12 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Hypoglycemia
Recommendations regarding the classiﬁcation of hypoglycemia are outlined in Table 6.4. See the complete
2023 Standards of Care for detailed hypoglycemia
strategies.
Recommendations
6.10 Occurrence and risk for hypoglycemia should
be reviewed at every encounter and investigated as indicated. Awareness of hypoglycemia should be considered using validated
tools. C
6.11 Glucose (approximately 15–20 g) is the preferred treatment for the conscious individual
with blood glucose<70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L),
although any form of carbohydrate that contains
glucose may be used. Fifteen minutes after treatment, if BGM shows continued hypoglycemia,
the treatment should be repeated. Once the
BGM or glucose pattern is trending up, the individual should consume a meal or snack to prevent recurrence of hypoglycemia.B
6.12 Glucagon should be prescribed for all individuals
at increased risk of level 2 or 3 hypoglycemia, so
that it is available should it be needed. Caregivers, school personnel, or family members providing support to these individuals should know
where it is and when and how to administer it.
Glucagon administration is not limited to HCPs.E
6.13 Hypoglycemia unawareness or one or more
episodes of level 3 hypoglycemia should trigger
hypoglycemia avoidance education and reevaluation and adjustment of the treatment plan to decrease hypoglycemia.E
6.14 Insulin-treated patients with hypoglycemia unawareness, one level 3 hypoglycemic event, or a
pattern of unexplained level 2 hypoglycemia
should be advised to raise their glycemic targets
to strictly avoid hypoglycemia for at least several
weeks in order to partially reverse hypoglycemia
unawareness and reduce risk of future episodes.A
6.15 Ongoing assessment of cognitive function is suggested with increased vigilance for hypoglycemia
by the clinician, patient, and caregivers if impaired or declining cognition is found.B
7. DIABETES TECHNOLOGY
Diabetes technology includes insulin delivery devices such
as insulin pumps (also called continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion [CSII]) and connected insulin pens, glucose
monitoring devices via CGM systems and glucose meters,
automated insulin delivery (AID) systems that integrate
CGM and insulin delivery with algorithms to modulate insulin delivery, and diabetes self-management support
software.
General Device Principles
Recommendations
7.1 The type(s) and selection of devices should be individualized based on a person’ss p e c iﬁcn e e d s ,
preferences, and skill level. In the setting of an individual whose diabetes is partially or wholly
managed by someone else (e.g., a young child or
a person with cognitive impairment or dexterity,
psychosocial, and/or physical limitations), the
caregiver’s skills and preferences are integral to
the decision-making process.E
TABLE 6.3 Summary of Glycemic Recommendations for
Many Nonpregnant Adults With Diabetes
A1C <7.0% (53 mmol/mol)*#
Preprandial capillary
plasma glucose
80–130 mg/dL* (4.4–7.2 mmol/L)
Peak postprandial capillary
plasma glucose†
<180 mg/dL* (10.0 mmol/L)
*More or less stringent glycemic goals may be appropriate for individual patients. #CGM may be used to assess glycemic target as noted in
Recommendation 6.5b and Figure 6.1. Goals should be individualized
based on duration of diabetes, age/life expectancy, comorbid conditions, known CVD or advanced microvascular complications, hypoglycemia unawareness, and individual patient considerations (as per
Figure 6.2 in the complete 2023 Standards of Care).†Postprandial
glucose may be targeted if A1C goals are not met despite reaching
preprandial glucose goals. Postprandial glucose measurements should
be made 1–2 hours after the beginning of the meal, generally peak
levels in patients with diabetes.TABLE 6.4 Classiﬁcation of Hypoglycemia
Glycemic Criteria/Description
Level 1 Glucose <70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) and$54 mg/dL
(3.0 mmol/L)
Level 2 Glucose <54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L)
Level 3 A severe event characterized by altered mental and/or
physical status requiring assistance for treatment of
hypoglycemia
Reprinted from Agiostratidou G, Anhalt H, Ball D, et al. Diabetes Care
2017;40:1622–1630.
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 13
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

7.2 When prescribing a device, ensure that people
with diabetes/caregivers receive initial and ongoing education and training, either in-person or
remotely, and ongoing evaluation of technique,
results, and their ability to utilize data, including
uploading/sharing data (if applicable), to monitor and adjust therapy.C
7.5 Initiation of CGM, CSII, and/or AID early in
the treatment of diabetes can be beneﬁcial
depending on a person’s/caregiver’s needs and
preferences. C
BGM
Recommendations
7.7 People who are on insulin using BGM should be
encouraged to check their blood glucose levels
when appropriate based on their insulin therapy.
This may include checking when fasting, prior to
meals and snacks, after meals, at bedtime, prior to
exercise, when hypoglycemia is suspected, after
treating low blood glucose levels until they are
normoglycemic, when hyperglycemia is suspected, and prior to and while performing critical
tasks such as driving.B
7.9 Although BGM in individuals on noninsulin therapies has not consistently shown clinically signiﬁcant
reductions in A1C, it may be helpful when altering
nutrition plan, physical activity, and/or medications
(particularly medications that can cause hypoglycemia) in conjunction with a treatment adjustment
program.E
CGM Devices
Table 6.2 summarizes CGM-derived glycemic metrics,
and Table 7.3 deﬁnes the available types of CGM
devices.
Recommendations
7.11 Real-time CGM (rtCGM)A or intermittently
scanned CGM (isCGM)B should be offered for
diabetes management in adults with diabetes
on multiple daily injections (MDI) or CSII who
are capable of using the devices safely (either
by themselves or with a caregiver). The choice
of device should be made based on the individual’s circumstances, preferences, and needs.
7.12 rtCGM A or isCGMC should be offered for diabetes management in adults with diabetes on
basal insulin who are capable of using the devices safely (either by themselves or with a caregiver). The choice of device should be made
based on the individual’s circumstances, preferences, and needs.
7.15 In people with diabetes on MDI or CSII, rtCGM
devices should be used as close to daily as possible for maximal beneﬁt. A isCGM devices should
be scanned frequently, at a minimum once every
8 hours.A People with diabetes should have uninterrupted access to their supplies to minimize
gaps in CGM.A
7.17 Periodic use of rtCGM or isCGM or use of
professional CGM can be helpful for diabetes
management in circumstances where continuous
use of CGM is not appropriate, desired, or
available. C
7.18 Skin reactions, either due to irritation or allergy,
should be assessed and addressed to aid in successful use of devices.E
Inpatient Care
Recommendation
7.30 People with diabetes who are competent to
safely use diabetes devices such as insulin
pumps and CGM systems should be supported
to continue using them in an inpatient setting
TABLE 7.3 CGM Devices
Type of CGM Description
rtCGM CGM systems that measure and display glucose levels continuously.
isCGM with and without alarms CGM systems that measure glucose levels continuously but require scanning for visualization and storage
of glucose values.
Professional CGM CGM devices that are placed on the person with diabetes in the HCP ’so fﬁce (or with remote instruction)
and worn for a discrete period of time (generally 7–14 days). Data may be blinded or visible to the
person wearing the device. The data are used to assess glycemic patterns and trends. Unlike rtCGM and
isCGM devices, these devices are clinic-based and not owned by the person with diabetes.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
14 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

or during outpatient procedures, once
competency is established and proper supervision
is available.E
Other Technologies
See “7. Diabetes Technologies” in the complete 2023
Standards of Care for more information on insulin delivery systems, including insulin syringes, pens, connected pens, pumps, and AID systems; software
systems; and digital health systems that combine technology with online or virtual coaching.
An ADA resource available at consumerguide.diabetes.
org can help HCPs and people with diabetes make
decisions as to the initial choice of devices. Other
sources, including HCPs and device manufacturers,
can help people troubleshoot when difﬁculties
arise.
8. OBESITY AND WEIGHT MANAGEMENT FOR
THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF TYPE 2
DIABETES
Strong evidence exists that obesity management can delay the progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes
and is highly beneﬁcial in treating type 2 diabetes.
Assessment
Recommendations
8.1 Use person-centered, nonjudgmental language that fosters collaboration between individuals and HCPs, including person-ﬁrst
language (e.g., “person with obesity” rather
than “obese person ”). E
8.2 Measure height and weight and calculate BMI
at annual visits or more frequently. Assess
weight trajectory to inform treatment considerations. E
8.5 Individuals with diabetes and overweight or obesity may beneﬁt from modest or larger magnitudes of weight loss. Relatively small weight loss
(approximately 3–7% of baseline weight) improves glycemia and other intermediate CV risk
factors. A Larger, sustained weight losses
(>10%) usually confer greater beneﬁts, including disease-modifying effects and possible remission of type 2 diabetes, and may improve
long-term CV outcomes and mortality.B
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Behavioral
Therapy
Recommendations
8.6 Nutrition, physical activity, and behavioral therapy to achieve and maintain$5% weight loss
are recommended for most people with type 2
diabetes and overweight or obesity. Additional
weight loss usually results in further improvements in the management of diabetes and CV
risk. B
8.7 Such interventions should include a high
frequency of counseling ($16 sessions in
6 months) and focus on nutrition changes, physical activity, and behavioral strategies to achieve
a 500–750 kcal/day energy deﬁcit. A
8.10 Evaluate systemic, structural, and socioeconomic
factors that may impact nutrition patterns and
food choices, such as food insecurity and hunger,
access to healthful food options, cultural circumstances, and SDOH.C
8.11 For those who achieve weight loss goals, longterm ($1 year) weight maintenance programs
are recommended when available. Such programs should, at minimum, provide monthly
contact and support, recommend ongoing monitoring of body weight (weekly or more frequently) and other self-monitoring strategies,
and encourage regular physical activity
(200–300 minutes/week).A
8.12 Short-term nutrition intervention using structured, very-low-calorie meals (800–1,000 kcal/
day) may be prescribed for carefully selected individuals by trained practitioners in medical settings with close monitoring. Long-term,
comprehensive weight maintenance strategies
and counseling should be integrated to maintain
weight loss.B
Pharmacotherapy
Recommendations
8.16 Obesity pharmacotherapy is effective as an adjunct to nutrition, physical activity, and behavioral counseling for selected people with type 2
diabetes and BMI$27 kg/m
2. Potential beneﬁts
and risks must be considered.A
8.17 If obesity pharmacotherapy is effective (typically
deﬁned as$5% weight loss after 3 months’
use), further weight loss is likely with continued
use. When early response is insufﬁcient (typically <5% weight loss after 3 months’use) or if
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 15
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

there are signiﬁcant safety or tolerability issues,
consider discontinuation of the medication and
evaluate alternative medications or treatment
approaches. A
See Table 9.2 and Figure 9.3 for information on
glucose-lowering medications with weight efﬁcacy.
Approved Obesity Pharmacotherapy Options
Medications approved by the FDA for the treatment of
obesity are summarized in Table 8.2 of the complete
2023 Standards of Care. Nearly all of these medications
can improve glycemia in addition to weight loss for people with type 2 diabetes.
Metabolic Surgery
Recommendations
8.18 Metabolic surgery should be a recommended
option to treat type 2 diabetes in screened surgical candidates with BMI$40 kg/m2 (BMI
$37.5 kg/m2 in Asian American individuals)
and in adults with BMI 35.0–39.9 kg/m2
(32.5–37.4 kg/m2 in Asian American individuals) who do not achieve durable weight loss and
improvement in comorbidities (including hyperglycemia) with nonsurgical methods.A
8.19 Metabolic surgery may be considered as an option to treat type 2 diabetes in adults with BMI
30.0–34.9 kg/m
2 (27.5–32.4 kg/m2 in Asian
American individuals) who do not achieve durable weight loss and improvement in comorbidities (including hyperglycemia) with nonsurgical
methods. A
8.21 People being considered for metabolic surgery
should be evaluated for comorbid psychological
conditions and social and situational circumstances that have the potential to interfere with surgery outcomes.B
8.22 People who undergo metabolic surgery should
receive long-term medical and behavioral support and routine micronutrient, nutritional, and
metabolic status monitoring.B
9. PHARMACOLOGIC APPROACHES TO
GLYCEMIC TREATMENT
Pharmacologic Therapy for Adults With Type 1
Diabetes
See “9. Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic
Treatment” in the complete 2023 Standards of Care for
detailed information on pharmacologic approaches to
type 1 diabetes management.
Pharmacologic Therapy for Adults With Type 2
Diabetes
Figure 9.3 and Table 9.2 provide details for informed
decision-making on pharmacologic agents for type 2
diabetes.
Recommendations
9.4a Healthy lifestyle behaviors, DSMES, avoidance of
clinical inertia, and SDOH should be considered
in the glucose-lowering management of type 2
diabetes. Pharmacologic therapy should be
guided by person-centered treatment factors, including comorbidities and treatment goals.A
9.4b In adults with type 2 diabetes and established/
high risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
(ASCVD), heart failure (HF), and/or chronic kidney disease (CKD), the treatment regimen should
include agents that reduce cardiorenal risk.A
9.4c Pharmacologic approaches that provide adequate
efﬁcacy to achieve and maintain treatment goals
should be considered, such as metformin or other
agents, including combination therapy.A
9.4d Weight management is an impactful component
of glucose-lowering management in type 2 diabetes. The glucose-lowering treatment regimen
should consider approaches that support weight
management goals.A
9.5 Metformin should be continued upon initiation
of insulin therapy (unless contraindicated or
not tolerated) for ongoing glycemic and metabolic beneﬁts. A
9.6 Early combination therapy can be considered in
some individuals at treatment initiation to extend the time to treatment failure.A
9.7 The early introduction of insulin should be
considered if there is evidence of ongoing
catabolism (weight loss), if symptoms of hyperglycemia are present, or when A1C levels
(>10% [86 mmol/mol]) or blood glucose levels
($300 mg/dL [16.7 mmol/L]) are very high.E
9.8 A person-centered approach should guide the
choice of pharmacologic agents. Consider the effects on CV and renal comorbidities, efﬁcacy, hypoglycemia risk, impact on weight, cost and access,
risk for side effects, and individual preferences.E
9.9 Among individuals with type 2 diabetes who have
established ASCVD or indicators of high CV risk, established kidney disease, or HF, a sodium–glucose
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
16 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

TABLE 9.2 Medications for Lowering Glucose, Summary of Characteristics
*For agent-speciﬁc dosing recommendations, please refer to manufacturers’prescribing information.1Tsapas A, Avgerinos I, Karagiannis T, et al. Ann Intern Med 2020;173:278–286.
2Tsapas A, Karagiannis T, Kakotrichi P, et al. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2116–2124. CVOT, cardiovascular outcomes trial; GIP, gastric inhibitory polypeptide; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like
peptide 1 receptor agonist; NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; SQ, subcutaneous; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus. Reprinted from Davies MJ, ArodaVR, Collins BS, et al. Diabetes Care
2022;45:2753–2786.
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 17
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

FIGURE 9.3Use of glucose-lowering medications in the management of type 2 diabetes. ACEi, ACE inhibitor; ACR, albumin-to-creatinine ratio; CVOT, cardiovascular outcomes
trial; DPP-4i, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HHF, hospitalization for heart failure; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2
inhibitor; T2D, type 2 diabetes. Adapted from Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
18 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor and/or glucagonlike peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist with demonstrated CVD beneﬁt( F i g u r e9 . 3 ,T a b l e9 . 2 ,a n d
Tables 10.3B and 10.3C in the complete 2023 Standards of Care) is recommended as part of the glucoselowering regimen and comprehensive CV risk reduction, independent of A1C and in consideration of
person-speciﬁcf a c t o r s .( S e e“10. CVD AND RISK
MANAGEMENT,”for details on CV risk reduction
recommendations).A
9.10 In adults with type 2 diabetes, a GLP-1 receptor
agonist is preferred to insulin when possible.A
9.11 If insulin is used, combination therapy with a
GLP-1 receptor agonist is recommended for
greater efﬁcacy, durability of treatment effect,
and weight and hypoglycemia beneﬁt. A
9.13 Medication regimen and medication-taking behavior should be reevaluated at regular intervals
(every 3–6 months) and adjusted as needed to
incorporate speciﬁc factors that impact choice of
treatment (Figure 4.1 and Table 9.2).E
9.14 Clinicians should be aware of the potential for overbasalization with insulin therapy. Clinical signals
that may prompt evaluation of overbasalization include basal dose more than/C240.5 units/kg/day,
high bedtime–morning or post- to preprandial
glucose differential, hypoglycemia (aware or unaware), and high glycemic variability. Indication
of overbasalization should prompt reevaluation
to further individualize therapy.E
Both comprehensive lifestyle modiﬁcations and pharmacotherapy should begin at diagnosis. Not all treatment modiﬁcations involve sequential add-on
therapy, but may involve switching therapy or weaning current therapy to accommodate for changes in
the patient’s overall goals (e.g., the initiation of
agents for reasons beyond glycemic beneﬁt). See“9.
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment” in
the complete 2023 Standards of Care for more detailed information on pharmacologic approaches to
type 2 diabetes management, including Figure 9.4 for
guidance on intensifying to injectable therapies in
type 2 diabetes.
10. CVD AND RISK MANAGEMENT
ASCVD— deﬁned as coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, or peripheral arterial disease (PAD) presumed
to be of atherosclerotic origin— i st h el e a d i n gc a u s eo f
morbidity and mortality for individuals with
diabetes. Controlling individual CV risk factors helps
prevent or slow ASCVD in people with diabetes. HF is another major cause of morbidity and mortality from CVD.
Risk factors, including obesity/overweight, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, family history of premature coronary disease, CKD, and the presence of
albuminuria, should be assessed at least annually to
prevent and manage both ASCVD and HF.
The Risk Calculator
The American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association ASCVD risk calculator (Risk Estimator Plus)
is generally a useful tool to estimate 10-year risk of a
ﬁrst ASCVD event (available online at tools.acc.org/
ASCVD-Risk-Estimator-Plus).
Hypertension/BP Control
Hypertension, deﬁned as a systolic BP$130 mmHg or a
diastolic BP$80 mmHg, is common among people with
either type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
Screening and Diagnosis
Recommendations
10.1 BP should be measured at every routine clinical
visit. When possible, individuals found to have
elevated BP (systolic BP 120–129 mmHg and
diastolic <80 mmHg) should have BP conﬁrmed using multiple readings, including measurements on a separate day, to diagnose
hypertension. A Hypertension is deﬁned as a
systolic BP$130 mmHg or a diastolic BP$80
mmHg based on an average of$2 measurements obtained on$2 occasions.A Individuals
with BP$180/110 mmHg and CVD could be
diagnosed with hypertension at a single visit.E
10.2 All people with hypertension and diabetes
should monitor their BP at home.A
Treatment Goals
Recommendations
10.3 For people with diabetes and hypertension, BP
targets should be individualized through a
shared decision-making process that addresses
CV risk, potential adverse effects of antihypertensive medications, and patient preferences.B
10.4 People with diabetes and hypertension qualify
for antihypertensive drug therapy when the BP
is persistently elevated$130/80 mmHg. The
on-treatment target BP goal is<130/80 mmHg,
if it can be safely attained.B
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 19
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Treatment Strategies
Lifestyle Intervention
Recommendation
10.6 For people with BP>120/80 mmHg, lifestyle intervention consists of weight loss when indicated, a
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)style eating pattern including reducing sodium and
increasing potassium intake, moderation of alcohol
intake, and increased physical activity.A
Pharmacologic Interventions
Recommendations
10.8 Individuals with conﬁrmed ofﬁce-based BP
$160/100 mmHg should, in addition to lifestyle therapy, have prompt initiation and timely
titration of two drugs or a single-pill combination of drugs demonstrated to reduce CV events
in people with diabetes.A
10.10 Multiple-drug therapy is generally required to
achieve BP targets. However, combinations of
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers
(ARBs) and combinations of ACE inhibitors or
ARBs with direct renin inhibitors should not be
used. A
10.11 An ACE inhibitor or ARB, at the maximum
tolerated dose indicated for BP treatment, is
the recommendedﬁrst-line treatment for
hypertension in people with diabetes and
urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR)
$300 mg/g creatinineA or 30–299 mg/g
creatinine. B If one class is not tolerated, the
other should be substituted.B
10.12 For patients treated with an ACE inhibitor,
ARB, or diuretic, serum creatinine/estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) and serum
potassium levels should be monitored at least
annually. B
See Figure 10.2 in complete 2023 Standards of Care
for more information on hypertension treatment
strategies.
Resistant Hypertension
Recommendation
10.13 Individuals with hypertension who are not
meeting BP targets on three classes of antihypertensive medications (including a diuretic)
should be considered for mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonist (MRA) therapy.A
Lipid Management
Lifestyle Intervention
Recommendations
10.14 Lifestyle modiﬁcation focusing on weight loss
(if indicated); application of a Mediterranean
or DASH eating pattern; reduction of saturated
fat andtrans fat; increase of dietary n-3 fatty
acids, viscousﬁber, and plant stanols/sterols
intake; and increased physical activity should
be recommended to improve the lipid proﬁle
and reduce the risk of developing ASCVD in
people with diabetes.A
10.15 Intensify lifestyle therapy and optimize glycemic control for patients with elevated triglyceride levels ($150 mg/dL [1.7 mmol/L])
and/or low HDL cholesterol (<40 mg/dL
[1.0 mmol/L] for men,<50 mg/dL
[1.3 mmol/L] for women).C
Ongoing Therapy and Monitoring With Lipid
Panel
Recommendations
10.16 In adults not taking statins or other lipidlowering therapy, it is reasonable to obtain a
lipid proﬁle at the time of diabetes diagnosis,
at an initial medical evaluation, and every
5 years thereafter if under the age of 40 years,
or more frequently if indicated.E
10.17 Obtain a lipid proﬁle at initiation of statins or
other lipid-lowering therapy, 4–12 weeks after
initiation or a change in dose, and annually
thereafter, as it may help to monitor the
response to therapy and inform medication
taking. E
Statin Treatment
Primary Prevention
Recommendations
10.18 F o rp e o p l ew i t hd i a b e t e sa g e d4 0–75 years
without ASCVD, use moderate-intensity
statin therapy in addition to lifestyle
therapy. A
10.19 For people with diabetes aged 20–39 years
with additional ASCVD risk factors, it may be
reasonable to initiate statin therapy in addition
to lifestyle therapy.C
10.20 F o rp e o p l ew i t hd i a b e t e sa g e d4 0–75 at
higher CV risk, including those with one or
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
20 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

more ASCVD risk factors, it is recommended
to use high-intensity statin therapy to
reduce LDL cholesterol by $50% of baseline
and to target an LDL cholesterol goal of
<70 mg/dL. B
10.21 For people with diabetes aged 40–75 years at
higher CV risk, especially those with multiple
ASCVD risk factors and an LDL cholesterol
$70 mg/dL, it may be reasonable to add ezetimibe or a PCSK9 inhibitor to maximum tolerated statin therapy.C
10.22 In adults with diabetes aged>75 years already
on statin therapy, it is reasonable to continue
statin treatment.B
10.23 In adults with diabetes aged>75 years, it may
be reasonable to initiate moderate-intensity
statin therapy after discussion of potential beneﬁts and risks.C
Secondary Prevention
Recommendations
10.25 For people of all ages with diabetes and
ASCVD, high-intensity statin therapy should be
added to lifestyle therapy.A
10.26 For people with diabetes and ASCVD, treatment
with high-intensity statin therapy is recommended to target an LDL cholesterol reduction of
$50% from baseline and an LDL cholesterol goal
of <55 mg/dL. Addition of ezetimibe or a PCSK9
inhibitor with proven beneﬁti nt h i sp o p u l a t i o ni s
recommended if this goal is not achieved on
maximum tolerated statin therapy.B
10.27 For individuals who do not tolerate the intended intensity, the maximum tolerated statin
dose should be used.E
See “10. Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management”
in the complete 2023 Standards of Care for detailed
guidance on statin therapy in patients with diabetes.
Treatment of Other Lipoprotein Fractions or Targets
Recommendations
10.28 For individuals with fasting triglyceride levels
$500 mg/dL, evaluate for secondary causes of
hypertriglyceridemia and consider medical
therapy to reduce the risk of pancreatitis.C
10.29 In adults with moderate hypertriglyceridemia
(fasting or nonfasting triglycerides 175–
499 mg/dL), clinicians should address and
treat lifestyle factors (obesity and metabolic
syndrome), secondary factors (diabetes,
chronic liver or kidney disease and/or nephrotic syndrome, hypothyroidism), and medications that raise triglycerides.C
10.30 In individuals with ASCVD or other CV risk factors on a statin with controlled LDL cholesterol
but elevated triglycerides (135–499 mg/dL),
the addition of icosapent ethyl can be considered to reduce CV risk.A
Other Combination Therapy
Recommendations
10.31 Statin plusﬁbrate combination therapy has not
been shown to improve ASCVD and is generally
not recommended.A
10.32 Statin plus niacin combination therapy has
not been shown to provide additional CV
beneﬁ
t above statin therapy alone, may increase the risk of stroke with additional
side effects, and is generally not recommended. A
Lipid-Lowering Agents and Cognitive Function
The concern that lipid-lowering agents may adversely
affect cognitive function is not currently supported by
evidence and should not deter their use.
Antiplatelet Agents
Recommendations
10.33 Use aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) as a secondary prevention strategy in those with diabetes and a history of ASCVD.A
10.34 For individuals with ASCVD and documented
aspirin allergy, clopidogrel (75 mg/day) should
be used.B
10.35 Dual antiplatelet therapy (with low-dose
aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor) is reasonable
for a year after an acute coronary syndrome
and may have beneﬁts beyond this period.A
10.36 Long-term treatment with dual antiplatelet
therapy should be considered for individuals
with prior coronary intervention, high ischemic risk, and low bleeding risk to prevent
major adverse cardiovascular events
(MACE). A
10.37 Combination therapy with aspirin plus lowdose rivaroxaban should be considered for individuals with stable CAD and/or PAD and low
bleeding risk to prevent major adverse limb
and CV events.A
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 21
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

10.38 Aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) may be
considered as a primary prevention strategy
in those with diabetes who are at increased
CV risk, after a comprehensive discussion
with the patient on the beneﬁts versus the
comparable increased risk of bleeding. A
CVD
Screening
Recommendations
10.39 In asymptomatic individuals, routine screening for CAD is not recommended as it does
not improve outcomes as long as ASCVD risk
factors are treated.A
10.40 Consider investigations for CAD in the presence of any of the following: atypical cardiac
symptoms (e.g., unexplained dyspnea, chest
discomfort); signs or symptoms of associated
vascular disease including carotid bruits, transient ischemic attack, stroke, claudication, or
PAD; or electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities (e.g., Q waves).E
Treatment
Recommendations
10.41 Among people with type 2 diabetes who have
established ASCVD or established kidney disease, an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 receptor
agonist with demonstrated CVD beneﬁt (see
Tables 10.3B and 10.3C in the complete 2023
Standards of Care) is recommended as part of
the comprehensive CV risk reduction and/or
glucose-lowering regimens.A
10.41a In people with type 2 diabetes and established
ASCVD, multiple ASCVD risk factors, or diabetic kidney disease (DKD), an SGLT2 inhibitor with demonstrated CV beneﬁti s
recommended to reduce the risk of MACE
and/or HF hospitalization.A
10.41b In people with type 2 diabetes and established
ASCVD or multiple risk factors for ASCVD, a
GLP-1 receptor agonist with demonstrated CV
beneﬁt is recommended to reduce the risk of
MACE. A
10.41c In people with type 2 diabetes and established
ASCVD or multiple risk factors for ASCVD,
combined therapy with an SGLT2 inhibitor
with demonstrated CV beneﬁt and a GLP-1 receptor agonist with demonstrated CV beneﬁt
may be considered for additive reduction in
the risk of adverse CV and kidney events.A
10.42a In people with type 2 diabetes and established
HF with either preserved ejection fraction
(HFpEF) or reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF),
an SGLT2 inhibitor with proven beneﬁt in this
patient population is recommended to reduce
risk of worsening HF and CV death.A
10.42b In people with type 2 diabetes and established HF with either HFpEF or HFrEF, an
SGLT2 inhibitor with proven beneﬁt in this
patient population is recommended to improve symptoms, physical limitations, and
QoL. A
10.43 For people with type 2 diabetes and CKD
with albuminuria treated with maximum tolerated doses of ACE inhibitor or ARB, addition ofﬁnerenone is recommended to
improve CV outcomes and reduce the risk of
CKD progression.A
10.44 In people with known ASCVD, particularly
CAD, ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy is
recommended to reduce the risk of CV
events. A
10.45 In people with prior MI,b-blockers should be
continued for 3 years after the event.B
10.46 Treatment of individuals with HFrEF should
include ab-blocker with proven CV outcomes
beneﬁt, unless otherwise contraindicated.A
10.47 In people with type 2 diabetes with stable
HF, metformin may be continued for
glucose lowering if eGFR remains
>30 mL/min/1.73 m
2 but should be
avoided in unstable or hospitalized individuals with HF. B
Candidates for advanced or invasive cardiac testing include those with1) typical or atypical cardiac symptoms
and 2) an abnormal resting ECG.
11. CKD AND RISK MANAGEMENT
CKD
Optimize glucose and BP control and reduce BP variability to reduce the risk or slow the progression of
CKD.
Screening
Recommendations
11.1a At least annually, urinary albumin (e.g., spot
UACR) and eGFR should be assessed in people
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
22 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

with type 1 diabetes with duration of$5y e a r s
and in all people with type 2 diabetes regardless of treatment.B
11.1b In people with established DKD, urinary albumin (e.g., spot UACR) and eGFR should be
monitored 1–4 times per year depending on
the stage of the disease (see Figure 11.1 in
the complete 2023 Standards of Care).B
Treatment
Recommendations
11.4a In nonpregnant people with diabetes and hypertension, either an ACE inhibitor or an ARB
is recommended for those with moderately increased albuminuria (UACR 30–299 mg/g
creatinine) B and is strongly recommended for
those with severely increased albuminuria
(UACR $300 mg/g creatinine) and/or eGFR
<60 mL/min/1.73 m
2. A
11.4b Periodically monitor serum creatinine and potassium levels for the development of increased
creatinine and hyperkalemia when ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and MRAs are used, or hypokalemia
when diuretics are used.B
11.4c An ACE inhibitor or an ARB is not recommended for the primary prevention of CKD in
people with diabetes who have normal BP, normal UACR (<30 mg/g creatinine), and normal
eGFR. A
11.4d Do not discontinue renin-angiotensin
system blockade for increases in serum creatinine (#30%) in the absence of volume depletion. A
11.5a For people with type 2 diabetes and DKD,
u s eo fa nS G L T 2i n h i b i t o ri sr e c o m m e n d e d
to reduce CKD progression and CV events in
patients with an eGFR$20 mL/min/1.73 m
2
and urinary albumin$200 mg/g creatinine.A
11.5b For people with type 2 diabetes and DKD, use
of an SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended to reduce CKD progression and CV events in patients with an eGFR$20 mL/min/1.73 m
2 and
urinary albumin ranging from normal to
200 mg/g creatinine.B
11.5c In people with type 2 diabetes and DKD, consider use of SGLT2 inhibitors (if eGFR is
$20 mL/min/1.73 m2), a GLP-1 receptor agonist, or a nonsteroidal MRA (if eGFR is
$25 mL/min/1.73 m
2) additionally for CV risk
reduction. A
11.5d In people with CKD and albuminuria who are
at increased risk for CV events or CKD progression, a nonsteroidal MRA shown to be effective
in clinical trials is recommended to reduce CKD
progression and CV events.A
11.6 In people with CKD who have$300 mg/g urinary albumin, a reduction of 30% or greater in
mg/g urinary albumin is recommended to slow
CKD progression.B
11.7 For people with non–dialysis-dependent
stage 3 or higher CKD, dietary protein intake
should be aimed to a target level of 0.8 g/kg
body weight per day.A For patients on dialysis, higher levels of dietary protein intake
should be considered since protein energy
wasting is a major problem in some individuals on dialysis.B
11.8 Patients should be referred for evaluation
by a nephrologist if they have continuously
increasing urinary albumin levels and/or continuously decreasing eGFR and if the eGFR is
<30 mL/min/1.73 m
2. A
11.9 Promptly refer to a nephrologist for uncertainty
about the etiology of kidney disease, difﬁcult
management issues, and rapidly progressing
kidney disease.A
Diagnosis, Staging, and Surveillance of DKD
DKD is diagnosed based on the presence and degree of
albuminuria and/or reduced eGFR in the absence of
symptoms of other primary causes of kidney damage.
Two of three specimens of UACR collected within a
3- to 6-month period should be abnormal before considering a patient to have albuminuria. eGFR should be
calculated from serum creatinine using a validated formula. The Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equation is generally preferred.
Race should not be included in the formula as race is a
social and not a biologic construct. CKD is staged as detailed in Figure 11.1 in the complete 2023 Standards of
Care.
Selection of Glucose-Lowering Medications for
People With CKD
eGFR should be monitored while taking metformin, which
can be used in patients with eGFR$30 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Reassess beneﬁts and risks of continuing treatment
when eGFR falls to<45 mL/min/1.73 m2, and do not
initiate metformin in patients with an eGFR already
at this level. Temporarily discontinue at the time of or
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 23
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

before iodinated contrast imaging procedures in patients
with eGFR 30–60 mL/min/1.73 m2.
See Table 9.2 for general drug-speciﬁcf a c t o r s ,i n c l u d i n g
adverse event information, for antihyperglycemic agents.
Nonsteroidal MRAs in CKD
Finerenone can reduce DKD, CV events, and HF hospitalization in people with advanced DKD, but it
should be used with caution due to a risk of hyperkalemia. It can be used with SGLT2 inhibitors.
12. RETINOPATHY, NEUROPATHY, AND FOOT CARE
Management of glycemia, BP, and lipids can reduce the
risk or slow the progression of microvascular complications of diabetes.
Diabetic Retinopathy
Screening
Recommendations
12.4 People with type 2 diabetes should have an initial dilated and comprehensive eye examination
by an ophthalmologist or optometrist at the
time of the diabetes diagnosis.B
12.5 If there is no evidence of diabetic retinopathy
(DR) for one or more annual eye exams and
glycemia is well controlled, then screening every 1–2 years may be considered. If any level of
DR is present, subsequent dilated retinal examinations should be repeated at least annually by
an ophthalmologist or optometrist. If DR is progressing or sight-threatening, then examinations will be required more frequently.B
12.6 Programs that use retinal photography (with
remote reading or use of a validated assessment tool) to improve access to DR screening
can be appropriate screening strategies for DR.
Such programs need to provide pathways for
timely referral for a comprehensive eye examination when indicated.B
Treatment
Recommendations
12.9 Promptly refer individuals with any level of diabetic macular edema, moderate or worse nonproliferative DR (a precursor of proliferative
DR), or any proliferative DR to an ophthalmologist who is knowledgeable and experienced in
the management of DR.A
12.14 The presence of DR is not a contraindication to
aspirin therapy for cardioprotection, as aspirin
does not increase the risk of retinal hemorrhage. A
For more information about treatment of DR, see“12.
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care” in the complete 2023 Standards of Care.
Neuropathy
Screening
Recommendations
12.15 All people with diabetes should be assessed for
diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) starting
at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes and 5 years after
the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and at least annually thereafter.B
12.16 Assessment for distal symmetric polyneuropathy should include a careful history and assessment of either temperature or pinprick
sensation (small-ﬁber function) and vibration
sensation using a 128-Hz tuning fork (for
large-ﬁber function). All people with diabetes
should have annual 10-g monoﬁlament testing
to identify feet at risk for ulceration and amputation. B
12.17 Symptoms and signs of autonomic neuropathy
should be assessed in people with diabetes
starting at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes and
5 years after the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes
and at least annually thereafter and with evidence of other microvascular complications,
particularly kidney disease and DPN. Screening
can include asking about orthostatic dizziness,
syncope, or dry cracked skin in the extremities.
Signs of autonomic neuropathy include orthostatic hypotension, a resting tachycardia, or
evidence of peripheral dryness or cracking of
skin. E
Treatment
Recommendation
12.20 Gabapentinoids, serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants,
and sodium channel blockers are recommended
as initial pharmacologic treatments for neuropathic pain in diabetes.A Refer to neurologist
or pain specialist when pain control is not
achieved within the scope of practice of the
treating physician. E
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
24 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Foot Care
Recommendations
12.21 Perform a comprehensive foot evaluation at
least annually to identify risk factors for ulcers
and amputations.A
12.22 The examination should include inspection of the
skin, assessment of foot deformities, neurological
assessment (10-g monoﬁlament testing with at
least one other assessment: pinprick, temperature, vibration), and vascular assessment, includi n gp u l s e si nt h el e g sa n df e e t .B
12.23 Individuals with evidence of sensory loss or
prior ulceration or amputation should have
their feet inspected at every visit.A
12.24 Obtain a prior history of ulceration, amputation, Charcot foot, angioplasty or vascular surgery, cigarette smoking, retinopathy, and renal
disease and assess current symptoms of neuropathy (pain, burning, numbness) and vascular
disease (leg fatigue, claudication).B
12.25 Initial screening for PAD should include assessment of lower-extremity pulses, capillary reﬁll
time, rubor on dependency, pallor on elevation,
and venousﬁlling time. Individuals with a history of leg fatigue, claudication, and rest pain
relieved with dependency or decreased or absent pedal pulses should be referred for ankle–
brachial index and for further vascular assessment as appropriate.B
12.26 A multidisciplinary approach is recommended
for individuals with foot ulcers and high-risk
feet (e.g., those on dialysis, those with Charcot
foot, those with a history of prior ulcers or amputation, those with PAD).B
12.27 Refer individuals who smoke and have a history of prior lower-extremity complications,
loss of protective sensation, structural abnormalities, or PAD to foot care specialists for ongoing preventive care and lifelong
surveillance. B
12.28 Provide general preventive foot self-care education to all people with diabetes, including
those with loss of protective sensation, on appropriate ways to examine their feet (palpation or visual inspection with an unbreakable
mirror) for daily surveillance of early foot
problems. B
12.29 The use of specialized therapeutic footwear is
recommended for people with diabetes at high
risk for ulceration, including those with loss of
protective sensation, foot deformities, ulcers,
callous formation, poor peripheral circulation,
or history of amputation.B
13. OLDER ADULTS
Recommendations
13.1 Consider the assessment of medical, psychological, functional (self-management abilities), and social domains in older adults to
provide a framework to determine targets
and therapeutic approaches for diabetes
management. B
13.2 Screen for geriatric syndromes (i.e., polypharmacy, cognitive impairment, depression, urinary incontinence, falls, persistent pain, and
frailty) in older adults, as they may affect diabetes self-management and diminish QoL.B
Diabetes in older adults is associated with higher
rates of premature death, functional disability,
accelerated muscle loss, coexisting illnesses and
geriatric syndromes. When assessing older adults
with diabetes, it is important to accurately
c a t e g o r i z et h et y p eo fd i a b e t e sa sw e l la st h e i r
complications and treatment-related concerns,
such as fear of hypoglycemia.
Neurocognitive Function
Recommendation
13.3 Screening for early detection of mild cognitive
impairment or dementia should be performed
for adults 65 years of age or older at the initial
visit, annually, and as appropriate.B
People with diabetes have higher incidences of allcause dementia, Alzheimer disease, and vascular
dementia. Ongoing studies are evaluating whether
preventing or delaying diabetes onset may help to
maintain cognitive function in older adults. However,
studies examining the effects of intensive glycemic
and BP control have not demonstrated a reduction in
cognitive decline.
Hypoglycemia
Recommendations
13.4 Because older adults with diabetes have a
greater risk of hypoglycemia than younger
adults, episodes of hypoglycemia should be
ascertained and addressed at routine visits.B
13.6 For older adults with type 2 diabetes on multiple daily doses of insulin, CGM should be
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 25
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

considered to improve glycemic outcomes
and decrease glucose variability. B
Older adults are at higher risk of hypoglycemia for
many reasons and should be routinely queried about
hypoglycemia and hypoglycemia unawareness. Glycemic targets and pharmacologic treatments may need to
be adjusted to minimize hypoglycemia.
Treatment Goals
P r o v i d e r sc a r i n gf o ro l d e ra d u l t sw i t hd i a b e t e sm u s tt a k e
clinical, cognitive, and functional differences into consideration when setting and prioritizing treatment goals.
Table 13.1 provides a treatment goal framework for older
patients.
Lifestyle Management
Recommendations
13.13 Optimal nutrition and protein intake is recommended for older adults; regular exercise, including aerobic activity, weight-bearing
exercise, and/or resistance training, should be
encouraged in all older adults who can safely
engage in such activities.B
13.14 For older adults with type 2 diabetes, overweight/
obesity, and capacity to safely exercise, an intensive lifestyle intervention focused on dietary
changes, physical activity, and modest weight loss
(e.g., 5–7%) should be considered for its beneﬁts
on QoL, mobility and physical functioning, and
cardiometabolic risk factor control.A
TABLE 13.1 Framework for Considering Treatment Goals for Glycemia, BP, and Dyslipidemia in Older Adults With
Diabetes
Patient
Characteristics/
Health Status Rationale
Reasonable A1C
Goal‡
Fasting or
Preprandial
Glucose Bedtime Glucose BP Lipids
Healthy (few
coexisting chronic
illnesses, intact
cognitive and
functional status)
Longer remaining
life expectancy
<7.0–7.5%
(53–58 mmol/mol)
80–130 mg/dL
(4.4–7.2 mmol/L)
80–180 mg/dL
(4.4–10.0 mmol/L)
<130/80 mmHg Statin, unless
contraindicated or
not tolerated
Complex/
intermediate
(multiple coexisting
chronic illnesses*
or two or more
instrumental ADL
impairments or
mild-to-moderate
cognitive
impairment)
Intermediate
remaining life
expectancy, high
treatment burden,
hypoglycemia
vulnerability, fall
risk
<8.0%
(64 mmol/mol)
90–150 mg/dL
(5.0–8.3 mmol/L)
100–180 mg/dL
(5.6–10.0 mmol/L)
<130/80 mmHg Statin, unless
contraindicated or
not tolerated
Very complex/poor
health (LTC or endstage chronic
illnesses** or
moderate-to-severe
cognitive
impairment or two
or more ADL
impairments)
Limited remaining
life expectancy
makes beneﬁt
uncertain
Avoid reliance on
A1C; glucose
control decisions
should be based
on avoiding
hypoglycemia and
symptomatic
hyperglycemia
100–180 mg/dL
(5.6–10.0 mmol/L)
110–200 mg/dL
(6.1–11.1 mmol/L)
<140/90 mmHg Consider
likelihood of
beneﬁt with statin
This table represents a consensus framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, BP, and dyslipidemia in older adults with diabetes. The patient characteristic categories are general concepts. Not every patient will clearly fall into a particular category. Consideration of
patient and caregiver preferences is an important aspect of treatment individualization. Additionally, a patient’s health status and preferences may change over time.‡A lower A1C goal may be set for an individual if achievable without recurrent or severe hypoglycemia or undue treatment burden.*Coexisting chronic illnesses are conditions serious enough to require medications or lifestyle management and may
include arthritis, cancer, HF, depression, emphysema, falls, hypertension, incontinence, stage 3 or worse CKD, MI, and stroke.“Multiple”
means at least three, but many patients may haveﬁve or more.**The presence of a single end-stage chronic illness, such as stage 3–4H F
or oxygen-dependent lung disease, CKD requiring dialysis, or uncontrolled metastatic cancer, may cause signiﬁcant symptoms or impairment of functional status and signiﬁcantly reduce life expectancy. ADL, activities of daily living. Adapted from Kirkman MS, Briscoe VJ,
Clark N, et al. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2650–2664.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
26 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Pharmacologic Therapy
Recommendations
13.15 In older adults with type 2 diabetes at increased risk of hypoglycemia, medication classes with low risk of hypoglycemia are
preferred. B
13.16 Overtreatment of diabetes is common in older
adults and should be avoided.B
13.17 Deintensiﬁcation of treatment goals is recommended to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia if it
can be achieved within the individualized A1C
target. B
13.18 Simpliﬁcation of complex treatment plans (especially insulin) is recommended to reduce the
risk of hypoglycemia and polypharmacy and decrease the burden of the disease if it can be
achieved within the individualized A1C target.B
13.19 Consider costs of care and insurance coverage
rules when developing treatment plans in order to reduce risk of cost-related barriers to
adherence. B
Older adults require individualized diabetes pharmacotherapy and glycemic targets. See Figure 9.3 for
general recommendations regarding person- and drugspeciﬁc factors to consider when selecting glucoselowering agents. Providers should consider the cost and
complexity of treatment to reduce barriers to adherence.
Metformin is theﬁrst-line agent for older adults with
type 2 diabetes, although it can cause problematic
gastrointestinal side effects and vitamin B12 deﬁciency. Thiazolidinediones and longer-acting sulfonylureas should be avoided. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4
inhibitors are well tolerated. GLP-1 receptor agonists
and SGLT2 inhibitors have CV and renal beneﬁts
that extend to older adults, although class-speciﬁc
side effects may limit their use. Multiple daily insulin
therapy may be too complex for many older patients.
Simpli ﬁcation of the insulin plan to match an individual ’s self-management abilities has been shown
to reduce hypoglycemia and disease-related distress
without worsening glycemic outcomes. Figure 13.1
in the complete 2023 Standards of Care provides an
approach to insulin plan simpliﬁcation.
Treatment in Skilled Nursing Facilities and
Nursing Homes
Recommendations
13.20 Consider diabetes education for the staff of
long-term care (LTC) and rehabilitation
facilities to improve the management of older
adults with diabetes.E
13.21 People with diabetes residing in LTC
facilities need careful assessment to establish
individualized glycemic goals and to make
appropriate choices of glucose-lowering
agents based on their clinical and functional
status. E
13.22 Consider use of CGM to assess risk for hypoglycemia in older adults treated with sulfonylureas
or insulin.E
Older adults in LTC may have irregular and unpredictable meal consumption, undernutrition, anorexia, or
impaired swallowing. Meals tailored to patients’culture, preferences, and personal goals may increase QoL,
satisfaction with meals, and nutrition status. It may be
helpful to give insulin after meals to ensure that the
dose is appropriate for the amount of carbohydrate consumed in the meal.
End-of-Life Care
Recommendations
13.23 When palliative care is needed in older adults
with diabetes, HCPs should initiate conversations regarding the goals and intensity of care.
Strict glucose and BP control are not necessaryE,
and simpliﬁcation of regimens can be considered.
Similarly, the intensity of lipid management can
be relaxed, and withdrawal of lipid-lowering
therapy may be appropriate.A
13.24 Overall comfort, prevention of distressing
symptoms, and preservation of QoL and dignity
are primary goals for diabetes management at
the end of life.C
14. CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
The management of diabetes in children and adolescents cannot simply be derived from care routinely provided to adults with diabetes. The epidemiology,
pathophysiology, developmental considerations, and response to therapy in pediatric-onset diabetes are different from adult diabetes.
See “14. Children and Adolescents” in the complete
2023 Standards of Care for speciﬁc recommendations
regarding the comprehensive treatment of type 1 and
type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents. The ADA
position statements“Type 1 Diabetes in Children and
Adolescents” and “Evaluation and Management of
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 27
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Youth-Onset Type 2 Diabetes” provide additional
information.
Type 1 Diabetes
A multidisciplinary team of specialists trained in pediatric diabetes management and sensitive to the challenges
of children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes and their
families, as well as the unique aspects of pediatric diabetes management, should provide care for this population.
Type 2 Diabetes
Evidence suggests that type 2 diabetes in youth is different not only from type 1 diabetes, but also from type 2
diabetes in adults, with a more rapid, progressive decline inb-cell function and accelerated development of
diabetes complications.
Management
Treatment of youth-onset type 2 diabetes should include
lifestyle management, diabetes self-management education,
and pharmacologic treatment. Self-management in pediatric diabetes involves both the youth and their adult
caregivers. Current pharmacologic treatment options for
youth-onset type 2 diabetes are limited to three classes of
drugs: insulin, metformin, and, in those$10 years of age
with no contraindications, GLP-1 receptor agonists indicated
for use in youth. As comorbidities may already be present at
the time of diagnosis, screening and treatment of risk factors
are recommended. Consideration of the sociocultural context and efforts to personalize diabetes management are of
critical importance to minimize barriers to care, enhance adherence, and maximize response to treatment.
Glycemic Targets
Recommendations
14.63 A reasonable A1C target for most children
and adolescents with type 2 diabetes is<7%
(53 mmol/mol). More stringent A1C targets
(such as<6.5% [48 mmol/mol]) may be appropriate for selected individuals if they can
be achieved without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia
or other adverse effects of treatment. Appropriate individuals might include those with
short duration of diabetes and lesser degrees
of b-cell dysfunction and individuals treated
with lifestyle or metformin only who achieve
signiﬁcant weight improvement.E
14.64 Less stringent A1C goals (such as 7.5%
[58 mmol/mol]) may be appropriate if there
is an increased risk of hypoglycemia.E
Pharmacologic Management
Recommendations
14.66 Initiate pharmacologic therapy, in addition to
behavioral counseling for healthful nutrition
and physical activity changes, at diagnosis of
type 2 diabetes.A
14.74 Use of medications not approved by the FDA
for youth with type 2 diabetes is not recommended outside of research trials.B
In the complete 2023 Standards of Care, see recommendations 14.67–14.73 for guidance on the pharmacologic
management of type 2 diabetes in youth and Tables
14.1A and 14.1B for screening and treatment recommendations for type 1 and type 2 diabetes in youth.
Transition From Pediatric to Adult Care
Recommendation
14.111 Pediatric diabetes care teams should begin to
prepare youth for transition to adult health
care in early adolescence and, at the latest, at
least 1 year before the transition.E
To prevent a lapse in care, coordination between the pediatric and adult care teams is recommended. See the
ADA position statement,“Diabetes Care for Emerging
Adults: Recommendations for Transition from Pediatric
to Adult Diabetes Care Systems” for a more comprehensive discussion.
15. MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES IN
PREGNANCY
Diabetes confers signiﬁcantly greater maternal and fetal
risk largely related to the degree of hyperglycemia but
also related to chronic complications and comorbidities
of diabetes. In general, speciﬁc risks of diabetes in pregnancy include spontaneous abortion, fetal anomalies,
preeclampsia, fetal demise, macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, among others. In addition,
diabetes in pregnancy may increase the risk of obesity,
hypertension, and type 2 diabetes in offspring later in
life.
Preconception Counseling and Care
Recommendations
15.1 Starting at puberty and continuing in all people with diabetes and reproductive potential,
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
28 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

preconception counseling should be incorporated into routine diabetes care.A
15.2 Family planning should be discussed, and effective contraception (with consideration of longacting, reversible contraception) should be
prescribed and used until an individual’st r e a t ment plan and A1C are optimized for pregnancy. A
15.3 Preconception counseling should address the
importance of achieving glucose levels as close
to normal as is safely possible, ideally A1C
<6.5% (48 mmol/mol), to reduce the risk of
congenital anomalies, preeclampsia, macrosomia, preterm birth, and other complications.A
15.5 In addition to focused attention on achieving
glycemic targetsA, standard preconception
care should be augmented with extra focus on
nutrition, diabetes education, and screening for
diabetes comorbidities and complications.B
15.6 Individuals with preexisting type 1 or type 2
diabetes who are planning a pregnancy or
who have become pregnant should be counseled on the risk of development and/or progression of DR. Dilated eye examinations
should occur ideally before pregnancy or in
the ﬁrst trimester, and then pregnant individuals should be monitored every trimester and
for 1 year postpartum as indicated by the degree of retinopathy and as recommended by
the eye care HCP.B
The preconception care of people with diabetes is detailed
in Table 15.1 in the complete 2023 Standards of Care.
Management of GDM
Recommendations
15.14 Lifestyle behavior change is an essential component of management of GDM and may sufﬁce as treatment for many individuals. Insulin
should be added if needed to achieve glycemic targets.A
15.15 Insulin is the preferred medication for treating
hyperglycemia in GDM. Metformin and glyburide should not be used asﬁrst-line agents, as
both cross the placenta to the fetus.A Other
oral and noninsulin injectable glucose-lowering
medications lack long-term safety data.
15.17 Telehealth visits for pregnant people with
GDM improve outcomes compared with standard in-person care.A
Pregnancy and Drug Considerations
Recommendations
15.21 In pregnant individuals with diabetes and
chronic hypertension, a BP threshold of 140/90
mmHg for initiation or titration of therapy is associated with better pregnancy outcomes than
reserving treatment for severe hypertension,
with no increase in risk of small-for-gestationalage birth weight.A T h e r ea r el i m i t e dd a t ao n
the optimal lower limit, but therapy should be
lessened for BP<90/60 mmHg.E AB Pt a r g e t
of 110–135/85 mmHg is suggested in the
interest of reducing the risk for accelerated
maternal hypertension.A
15.22 Potentially harmful medications in pregnancy
(i.e., ACE inhibitors, ARBs, statins) should be
stopped prior to conception and avoided in sexually active individuals of childbearing potential
who are not using reliable contraception.B
Postpartum Care
Recommendations
15.23 Insulin resistance decreases dramatically immediately postpartum, and insulin requirements need to be evaluated and adjusted as
they are often roughly half the prepregnancy
requirements for the initial few days postpartum. C
15.24 A contraceptive plan should be discussed and
implemented with all people with diabetes of
reproductive potential.A
15.25 Screen individuals with a recent history of
GDM at 4–12 weeks postpartum, using the
75-g OGTT and clinically appropriate nonpregnancy diagnostic criteria.B
15.26 Individuals with overweight/obesity and a history of GDM found to have prediabetes should
receive intensive lifestyle interventions and/or
metformin to prevent diabetes.A
15.27 Breastfeeding is recommended to reduce the
risk of maternal type 2 diabetes and should be
considered when choosing whether to breastfeed or formula feed.B
15.28 Individuals with a history of GDM should
have lifelong screening for the development
of type 2 diabetes or prediabetes every
1–3y e a r s .B
15.30 Postpartum care should include psychosocial
assessment and support for self-care.E
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 29
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

16. DIABETES CARE IN THE HOSPITAL
Among hospitalized individuals, hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, and glucose variability are associated with adverse outcomes, including death. Therefore, careful
management of people with diabetes during hospitalization has direct and immediate beneﬁts. When caring
for hospitalized people with diabetes, consult with a
specialized diabetes or glucose management team when
possible.
Hospital Care Delivery Standards
Recommendations
16.1 Perform an A1C test on all people with diabetes
or hyperglycemia (blood glucose>140 mg/dL
[7.8 mmol/L]) admitted to the hospital if not
performed in the prior 3 months.B
16.2 Insulin should be administered using validated
written or computerized protocols that allow for
predeﬁned adjustments in the insulin dosage
based on glycemicﬂuctuations. B
High-quality hospital care for diabetes requires standards for care delivery, which are best implemented using structured order sets, and quality improvement
strategies for process improvement.
Glycemic Targets in Hospitalized Adults
Recommendations
16.4 Insulin therapy should be initiated for the
treatment of persistent hyperglycemia starting
at a threshold$180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)
(checked on two occasions). Once insulin
therapy is started, a target glucose range of
140–180 mg/dL (7.8–10.0 mmol/L) is recommended for most critically ill and noncritically
ill patients. A
16.5 More stringent goals, such as 110–140 mg/dL
(6.1–7.8 mmol/L) or 100–180 mg/dL (5.6–
10.0 mmol/L), may be appropriate for selected
patients and are acceptable if they can be
achieved without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia.C
Hyperglycemia in hospitalized patients is deﬁned as
blood glucose levels>140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L). Hypoglycemia in hospitalized patients is classiﬁed the same
as in any setting (Table 6.4).
BGM
In hospitalized individuals with diabetes who are eating, point-of-care (POC) glucose monitoring should be
performed before meals; in those not eating, glucose
monitoring is advised every 4–6 hours. Although CGM
has theoretical advantages over POC glucose monitoring in detecting and reducing the incidence of hypoglycemia, it has not been approved by the FDA for
inpatient use.
Glucose-Lowering Treatment in Hospitalized
Patients
Recommendations
16.6 Basal insulin or a basal plus bolus correction insulin regimen is the preferred treatment for
noncritically ill hospitalized patients with poor
oral intake or those who are taking nothing by
mouth. A
16.7 An insulin regimen with basal, prandial, and
correction components is the preferred treatment for most noncritically ill hospitalized patients with adequate nutritional intake.A
16.8 Use of a correction or supplemental insulin
without basal insulin (often referred to as a
sliding scale) in the inpatient setting is discouraged. A
Insulin Therapy
In the critical care setting, continuous intravenous insulin infusion is the most effective method for achieving
glycemic targets. When discontinuing intravenous insulin, a transition protocol is associated with less morbidity and lower costs of care.
In the noncritical care setting, insulin is the preferred
treatment for hyperglycemia. However, in certain circumstances, it may be appropriate to continue home
therapies, including oral glucose-lowering medications.
The safety and efﬁcacy of noninsulin glucose-lowering
therapies in the hospital setting is an area of active research. (See“16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital” in the
complete 2023 Standards of Care for details.) If oral
medications are held in the hospital but will be reinstated after discharge, there should be a protocol for
guiding resumption of home medications 1–2 days prior
to discharge.
An insulin schedule with basal and correction components is necessary for all hospitalized individuals
with type 1 diabetes, even when taking nothing by
mouth, with the addition of prandial insulin when
eating.
ABRIDGED STANDARDS OF CARE 2023
30 DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CLINICAL
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025

Hypoglycemia
Recommendations
16.9 A hypoglycemia management protocol should
be adopted and implemented by each hospital
or hospital system. A plan for preventing and
treating hypoglycemia should be established
for each individual. Episodes of hypoglycemia
in the hospital should be documented in the
medical record and tracked for quality improvement/quality assessment.E
16.10 Treatment regimens should be reviewed and
changed as necessary to prevent further hypoglycemia when a blood glucose value of<70
mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) is documented.C
People with or without diabetes may experience hypoglycemia in the hospital setting. While hypoglycemia is associated with increased mortality, in many cases, it is a marker
of an underlying disease rather than the cause of fatality.
Insulin is one of the most common drugs causing adverse
events in hospitalized patients, and errors in insulin dosing and/or administration occur relatively frequently.
MNT in the Hospital
The goals of MNT in the hospital are to provide adequate calories to meet metabolic demands, optimize
glycemic outcomes, address personal food preferences,
and facilitate the creation of a discharge plan.
Self-Management in the Hospital
Diabetes self-management in the hospital may be appropriate for speciﬁc individuals who wish to continue
to perform self-care while acutely ill.
Standards for Special Situations
See “16. DIABETES CARE IN THE HOSPITAL” in the
complete 2023 Standards of Care for guidance on enteral/parenteral feedings, glucocorticoid therapy, perioperative care, and DKA and hyperosmolar
hyperglycemic state.
Transition From the Hospital to the Ambulatory
Setting
Recommendation
16.11 A structured discharge plan should be tailored
to the individual with diabetes.B
Discharge planning should begin at admission and be
updated as individual needs change. See“16. Diabetes
Care in the Hospital” in the complete 2023 Standards of
Care for a discussion of appropriate discharge planning.
Preventing Admissions and Readmissions
People with diabetes are nearly twice as likely as those
without diabetes to be readmitted after hospitalization.
Strategies to reduce readmissions include targeting
ketosis-prone type 1 diabetes, treating individuals
with admission A1C>9% (75 mmol/mol) with insulin, and implementing a transitional care model.
17. DIABETES ADVOCACY
For a list of ADA advocacy position statements, including “Diabetes and Driving” and “Diabetes and Employment,” see “17. Diabetes Advocacy” in the complete
2023 Standards of Care.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This abridged version of theStandards of Care in Diabetes—2023
was created by the ADA’s Primary Care Advisory Group (PCAG),
with special thanks to PCAG chair Hope Feldman, CRNP, FNPBC, of Philadelphia, PA; ADA lead Nuha Ali ElSayed, MD, MMSc;
Rozalina G. McCoy, MD, MS, of Rochester, MN; Joy Moverley,
DHSc, MPH, PA-C, of Vallejo, CA; Sean M. Oser, MD, MPH, of
A u r o r a ,C O ;A l i s s aR .S e g a l ,P h a r m D ,C D C E S ,C D T C ,F C C P ,o f
Boston, MA; and Jennifer Trujillo, PharmD, FCCP, BCPS,
CDCES, BC-ADM, of Aurora, CO. Christopher W. Jones, MD, of
Murray, UT; Scott J. Pilla, MD, MHS, of Baltimore, MD; and Nay
Linn Aung, MD, BC-ADM, of Utica, NY, also contributed abridged
chapters. ADA staff support was provided by Caitlin Krekel,
MSPH, RD, Sarah Bradley, and Raveendhara R. Bannuru, MD,
PhD, FAGE.
The completeStandards of Care in Diabetes—2023 was developed by the ADA’s Professional Practice Committee: Nuha Ali
ElSayed, MD, MMSc (Chair), Grazia Aleppo, MD, Vanita R.
Aroda, MD, Raveendhara R. Bannuru, MD, PhD, FAGE (Chief
Methodologist), Florence M. Brown, MD, Dennis Bruemmer,
M D ,P h D ,B i l l yS .C o l l i n s ,D H S c ,P A - C ,M a r i s aE .H i l l i a r d ,P h D ,
Diana Isaacs, PharmD, BCPS, BCACP, CDCES, BC-ADM,
F A D C E S ,F C C P ,E r i cL .J o h n s o n ,M D ,S c o t tK a h a n ,M D ,M P H ,
Kamlesh Khunti, MD, PhD, FRCP, FRCGP, FMedSci, Jose
Leon, MD, MPH, Sarah K. Lyons, MD, Mary Lou Perry, MS,
RDN, CDCES, Priya Prahalad, MD, PhD, Richard E. Pratley, MD,
Jane Jeffrie Seley, DNP, MPH, MSN, BSN, RN, GNP, BC-ADM,
CDCES, CDTC, FADCES, FAAN, Robert C. Stanton, MD, and
Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD. American College of Cardiology—
Designated Representatives (Section 10) include Sandeep R.
Das, MD, MPH, FACC, and Mikhail Kosiborod, MD, FACC,
FAHA. Designated subject matter experts are Kenneth Cusi,
MD, FACP, FACE, Christopher H. Gibbons, MD, MMSc, John M.
Giurini, DPM, Lisa Murdock, Jennifer K. Sun, MD, MPH, Crystal
C. Woodward, Deborah Young-Hyman, PhD, FTOS, and Fel
SBM, CDCES. ADA staff are Raveendhara R. Bannuru, MD,
PhD, FAGE, Nuha Ali ElSayed, MD, MMSc, Robert A. Gabbay,
MD, PhD, Malaika I. Hill, MA, and Laura S. Mitchell.
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
V O L U M E4 1 ,N U M B E R1 ,W I N T E R2 0 2 3 31
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/clinical/article-pdf/41/1/4/697551/diaclincd23as01.pdf by guest on 11 August 2025